### Q5a. Explain different addressing modes of 8086 processor.

⇀ The way of specifying data to be operated by an instruction is known as addressing modes. 
This specifies that the given data is an immediate data or an address. 
It also specifies whether the given operand is register or register pair.

⇀ Types of addressing modes are as follows:

1. **Register Mode** — In this type of addressing mode both the operands are registers.

```asm
MOV AX, BX
XOR AX, DX
ADD AL, BL
```

2. **Immediate Mode** — In this type of addressing mode the source operand is a 8 bit or 16 bit data. 
Destination operand can never be immediate data.

```asm
MOV AX, 2000
MOV CL, 0A
ADD AL, 45
AND AX, 0000
MOV AX, 2000
MOV CS, AX
```

3. **Displacement or Direct Mode** — In this type of addressing mode the effective address is 
directly given in the instruction as displacement.

```asm
MOV AX, [DISP]
MOV AX, [0500]
```

4. **Register Indirect Mode** — In this addressing mode the effective address is in SI, DI or BX.

```asm
MOV AX, [DI]
ADD AL, [BX]
MOV AX, [SI]
```

5. **Based Indexed Mode** — In this the effective address is sum of base register and index register.

```asm
Base register: BX, BP
Index register: SI, DI
MOV AL, [BP+SI]
MOV AX, [BX+DI]
```

6. **Indexed Mode** — In this type of addressing mode the effective address is sum of 
index register and displacement.

```asm
MOV AX, [SI+2000]
MOV AL, [DI+3000]
```

7. **Based Mode** — In this the effective address is the sum of base register and displacement.

```asm
MOV AL, [BP+ 0100]
```

8. **Based Indexed Displacement Mode** — In this type of addressing mode the effective address is 
the sum of index register, base register and displacement.

```asm
MOV AL, [SI+BP+2000] 
```

9. **String Mode** — This addressing mode is related to string instructions. 
In this the value of SI and DI are auto incremented and decremented depending 
upon the value of directional flag.

```asm
MOVS B
MOVS W
```

10. **Input / Output Mode** — This addressing mode is related with input output operations.

```asm
IN A, 45
OUT A, 50
```

11. **Relative Mode** — In this the effective address is calculated with reference to 
instruction pointer.

```asm
JNZ 8 bit address
IP=IP+8 bit address
```

<hr />

### Q5b. Explain the operation of three 8259 PIC in cascaded mode.

⇀ 

<hr />

Sources

* https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/addressing-modes-8086-microprocessor/
